# Streaming JSON Encoder #

*Streaming JSON Encoder* is a PHP library that provides a set of classes to help
with encoding JSON in a streaming manner, i.e. allowing you to encode the JSON
document bit by bit rather than encoding the whole document at once. Compared to
the built in `json_encode` function, there are two main advantages:

  * You will not need to load the entire data set into memory, as the encoder
    supports iterating over both arrays and any kind of iterators, like
    generators, for example.
  * You will not need to load the entire resulting JSON document into the
    memory, since the JSON document will be encoded value by value and it's
    possible to output the encoded document piece by piece.
    
In other words, the Streaming JSON encoder can provide the greatest benefit
when you need handle large data sets that may otherwise take up too much memory
to process.

In order to increase interoperability, the library also provides a PSR-7
compatible stream to use with frameworks and HTTP requests.

## Requirements ##

In order to use this library, the following requirements must be met:

  * PHP version 5.6, 7.0 or later
  * The PHP library `psr/http-message` must be available

## Installation ##

The easiest way to install this library is to use Composer to handle your
dependencies. In order to install this library via Composer, simply follow
the following two steps:

  1. Acquire the `composer.phar` by running in your project root the
     Command-line installation script found at the [Composer
     Download](https://getcomposer.org/download/) page.
  2. Once you've run the installation script, you should have a `composer.phar` 
     file in you project root and you can run the following command:
    
     ```
     php composer.phar require "violet/streaming-json-encoder:^1.0"
     ```
    
If you are already familiar with how to use Composer, you may also alternatively
simply add the library as a dependency by adding the following `composer.json`
file to your project and running the `composer install` command:

```json
{
    "require": {
        "violet/streaming-json-encoder": "^1.0"
    }
}
```

After installing this library via Composer, you can load the library by
including the `vendor/autoload.php` file that was generated by Composer during
the installation.

### Manual installation ###

If you do not wish to use Composer to load the library, you may also download
the library manually by downloading the [latest release](https://github.com/violet/streaming-json-encoder/releases/latest)
and extracting the `src` folder to your project. You may then include the
provided `src/autoload.php` file to load the library classes.

Please note that using Composer will also automatically download the other
required PHP libraries. If you install this library manually, you will need to
also make those other required libraries available. 

## Usage ##

This library offers 3 main different ways to use the library via the classes
`BufferJsonEncoder`, `StreamJsonEncoder` and the PSR-7 compatible stream
`JsonStream`.

### Using BufferJsonEncoder ###

The buffer encoder is most useful when you need to generate the JSON document
in a way that does not involve passing callbacks to handle the generated JSON.

The easiest way to use the `BufferJsonEncoder` is to instantiate it with the
JSON value to encode and call the `encode()` method to return the entire output
as a string:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$encoder = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\BufferJsonEncoder(['array_value']);
echo $encoder->encode();
```

The most useful way to use this encoder, however, is to use it as an iterator.
As the encoder implements the `Iterator` interface, you can simply loop over the
generated JSON with a foreach loop:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$encoder = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\BufferJsonEncoder(range(0, 10));

foreach ($encoder as $string) {
    echo $string;
}
```

It's also worth noting that the encoder also supports iterators for values.
What's more, any closure passed to the encoder will also be called and the
return value used as the value instead. The previous example could also be
written as:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$encoder = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\BufferJsonEncoder(function () {
    for ($i = 0; $i <= 10; $i++) {
        yield $i;
    }
});

foreach ($encoder as $string) {
    echo $string;
}
```

As a side note, the encoder will respect the `JsonSerializable` interface as
well and will call the `jsonSerialize` for objects that implement the interface.

### Using StreamJsonEncoder ###

The stream encoder works very similarly to the `BufferJsonEncoder` as they
extend the same abstract class. However, the key difference is in how they
handle passing the JSON output.

The `StreamJsonEncoder` accepts a callable as the second constructor argument.
Whenever JSON needs to be outputted, this callable is called with two arguments,
the actual string to output and the type of the token to output (which is one
of the `JsonToken` constants).

If no callable is passed, the StreamJsonEncoder will simply output the JSON
using an echo statement. For example:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$encoder = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\StreamJsonEncoder(['array_value']);
$encoder->encode();
```

The `encode()` method in `StreamJsonEncoder` returns the total number of bytes
it passed to the output. This encoder makes it convenient, for example, to
write the JSON to file in a streaming manner. For example:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$fp = fopen('test.json', 'w');
$encoder = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\StreamJsonEncoder(
    range(1, 100),
    function ($json) use ($fp) {
        fwrite($fp, $json);
    }
);

$encoder->encode();
fclose($fp);
```

### Using JsonStream ###

The stream class provides a PSR-7 compatible `StreamInterface` for streaming
JSON content. It actually uses the `BufferJsonEncoder` to do the hard work and
simply wraps the calls in a stream like fashion.

The constructor of `JsonStream` either accepts a value to encode as JSON or an
instance of `BufferJsonEncoder` (which allows you to set the encoding options).
You can then operate on the stream using the methods provided by the PSR-7
interface. For example:

```php
<?php

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

$iterator = function () {
    foreach (new DirectoryIterator(__DIR__) as $file) {
        yield $file->getFilename();
    }
};

$encoder = (new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\BufferJsonEncoder($iterator))
    ->setOptions(JSON_PRETTY_PRINT);

$stream = new \Violet\StreamingJsonEncoder\JsonStream($encoder);

while (!$stream->eof()) {
    echo $stream->read(1024 * 8);
}
```

For more information about PSR-7 streams, please refer to the [PSR-7
documentation](http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/#psrhttpmessagestreaminterface).

### How the encoder resolves values ###

Since Streaming JSON Encoder only handles values one at a time and tries to
avoid loading entire data sets into memory at once, there are several
fundamental differences to how this library handles values compared to
`json_encode`.

To determine whether any given value should be encoded as an object or as an
array, the encoder makes the following decisions:

  * Only arrays that have keys from 0 to n-1 in that order are encoded as JSON
    arrays. All other arrays are encoded as objects.
  * Any object is encoded as a JSON array if the key of the first value
    returned by iterating over the objects equals to `0`. All other objects are
    encoded as JSON objects.
    
Additionally, prior to the decision whether to encode an object as an array or
an object is made, the encoder will attempt to resolve the value as follows:

  * As long as the processed value is a `JsonSerializable`, it will replace the
    processed value with the return value of the `jsonSerialize()` method.
  * As long as the processed value is a `Closure`, it will be replaced with the
    value returned by invoking the closure in question.
    
Note that it's possible to override the array or object decision by using the
`JSON_FORCE_OBJECT` option.

### JSON encoding options ###

Both `BufferJsonEncoder` and `StreamJsonEncoder` have a method `setOptions()` to
change the JSON encoding options. The accepted options are the same as those
accepted by `json_encode()` function. The encoder still internally uses the
`json_encode()` method to encode other values than arrays or object. A few
options also have additional effects on the encoders:

  * Using `JSON_FORCE_OBJECT` will force all arrays and values to be encoded
    as JSON objects similar to `json_encode()`.
  * Using `JSON_PRETTY_PRINT` causes the encoder to output whitespace to make
    a more readable output. The indentation used can be changed using the
    method `setIndent()` which accepts either a string argument to use as the
    indent or an integer to indicate the number of spaces.
  * Using `JSON_PARTIAL_OUTPUT_ON_ERROR` will cause the encoder to continue the
    output despite encoding errors. Otherwise the encoding will halt and the
    encoder will throw an `EncodingException`.

## Credits ##

This library is copyright 2016 - 2017 to Riikka Kalliomäki.

See LICENSE for license and copying information.
